docs/framework/angular/guides/basic-concepts.md, before:

---
id: basic-concepts
title: Basic Concepts and Terminology
---

This page introduces the basic concepts and terminology used in the `@tanstack/angular-form` library. Familiarizing yourself with these concepts will help you better understand and work with the library.

## Form Instance

A Form Instance is an object that represents an individual form and provides methods and properties for working with the form. You create a form instance using the `injectForm` function. The hook accepts an object with an `onSubmit` function, which is called when the form is submitted.

```typescript
const form = injectForm({
  onSubmit: async ({ value }) => {
    // Do something with form data
    console.log(value)
  },
})
```

## Field

A Field represents a single form input element, such as a text input or a checkbox. Fields are created using the `tanstackField` directive. The directive accepts a name prop, which should match a key in the form's default values. It also exposes a `field` named instance of the directive's internals that should be used via a template variable to access the field's internals.

Example:

```html
<ng-container [tanstackField]="form" name="firstName" #firstName="field">
  <input
    [value]="firstName.api.state.value"
    (blur)="firstName.api.handleBlur()"
    (input)="firstName.api.handleChange($any($event).target.value)"
  />
</ng-container>
```

## Field State

Each field has its own state, which includes its current value, validation status, error messages, and other metadata. You can access a field's state using the `fieldApi.state` property.

Example:

```ts
const {
  value,
  meta: { errors, isValidating },
} = field.state
```

There are four states in the metadata that can be useful to see how the user interacts with a field:

- _"isTouched"_, after the user changes the field or blurs the field
- _"isDirty"_, after the field's value has been changed, even if it's been reverted to the default. Opposite of _"isPristine"_
- _"isPristine"_, until the user changes the field value. Opposite of _"isDirty"_
- _"isBlurred"_, after the field has been blurred

```ts
const { isTouched, isDirty, isPristine, isBlurred } = field.state.meta
```

![Field states](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TanStack/form/main/docs/assets/field-states.png)

## Understanding 'isDirty' in Different Libraries

Non-Persistent `dirty` state

- **Libraries**: React Hook Form (RHF), Formik, Final Form.
- **Behavior**: A field is 'dirty' if its value differs from the default. Reverting to the default value makes it 'clean' again.

Persistent `dirty` state

- **Libraries**: Angular Form, Vue FormKit.
- **Behavior**: A field remains 'dirty' once changed, even if reverted to the default value.

We have chosen the persistent 'dirty' state model. To also support a non-persistent 'dirty' state, we introduce an additional flag:

- _"isDefaultValue"_, whether the field's current value is the default value

```ts
const { isDefaultValue, isTouched } = field.state.meta

// The following line will re-create the non-Persistent `dirty` functionality.
const nonPersistentIsDirty = !isDefaultValue
```

![Field states extended](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TanStack/form/main/docs/assets/field-states-extended.png)

## Field API

The Field API is an object accessed in the `tanstackField.api` property when creating a field. It provides methods for working with the field's state.

Example:

```angular-html
<input
  [value]="fieldName.api.state.value"
  (blur)="fieldName.api.handleBlur()"
  (input)="fieldName.api.handleChange($any($event).target.value)"
/>
```

## Validation

`@tanstack/angular-form` provides both synchronous and asynchronous validation out of the box. Validation functions can be passed to the `tanstackField` directive using the `validators` prop.

Example:

```angular-ts
@Component({
  selector: 'app-root',
  standalone: true,
  imports: [TanStackField],
  template: `
    <ng-container [tanstackField]="form" name="firstName" #firstName="field">
      <input
        [value]="firstName.api.state.value"
        (blur)="firstName.api.handleBlur()"
        (input)="firstName.api.handleChange($any($event).target.value)"
      />
    </ng-container>
  `,
})
export class AppComponent {
  firstNameValidator: FieldValidateFn<any, any, string, any> = ({
                                                                       value,
                                                                     }) =>
    !value
      ? 'A first name is required'
      : value.length < 3
        ? 'First name must be at least 3 characters'
        : undefined

  firstNameAsyncValidator: FieldValidateAsyncFn<any, string, any> =
    async ({ value }) => {
      await new Promise((resolve) => setTimeout(resolve, 1000))
      return value.includes('error') && 'No "error" allowed in first name'
    }

  form = injectForm({
    defaultValues: {
      firstName: '',
    },
    onSubmit({ value }) {
      console.log(value)
    },
  })
}
```

## Validation with Standard Schema Libraries

In addition to hand-rolled validation options, we also support the [Standard Schema](https://github.com/standard-schema/standard-schema) specification.

You can define a schema using any of the libraries implementing the specification and pass it to a form or field validator.

Supported libraries include:

- [Zod](https://zod.dev/) (v3.24.0 or higher)
- [Valibot](https://valibot.dev/) (v1.0.0 or higher)
- [ArkType](https://arktype.io/) (v2.1.20 or higher)
- [Yup](https://github.com/jquense/yup) (v1.7.0 or higher)

Example:

```angular-ts
import { z } from 'zod'

@Component({
  selector: 'app-root',
  standalone: true,
  imports: [TanStackField],
  template: `
    <ng-container
      [tanstackField]="form"
      name="firstName"
      [validators]="{
        onChange: z.string().min(3, 'First name must be at least 3 characters'),
        onChangeAsyncDebounceMs: 500,
        onChangeAsync: firstNameAsyncValidator
      }"
      #firstName="field"
    >
      <!-- ... -->
    </ng-container>
  `,
})
export class AppComponent {
  firstNameAsyncValidator = z.string().refine(
    async (value) => {
      await new Promise((resolve) => setTimeout(resolve, 1000))
      return !value.includes('error')
    },
    {
      message: "No 'error' allowed in first name",
    },
  )

  form = injectForm({
    defaultValues: {
      firstName: '',
    },
    onSubmit({ value }) {
      // Do something with form data
      console.log(value)
    },
  })

  z = z
}
```

## Reactivity

`@tanstack/angular-form` offers a way to subscribe to form and field state changes via `injectStore(this.form, selector)`.

Example:

```typescript
import { injectForm, injectStore } from '@tanstack/angular-form'

@Component(/*...*/)
class AppComponent {
  form = injectForm(/*...*/)
  canSubmit = injectStore(this.form, (state) => state.canSubmit)
  isSubmitting = injectStore(this.form, (state) => state.isSubmitting)
}
```

## Listeners

`@tanstack/angular-form` allows you to react to specific triggers and "listen" to them to dispatch side effects.

Example:

```angular-ts
@Component({
  selector: 'app-root',
  standalone: true,
  imports: [TanStackField],
  template: `
    <ng-container
      [tanstackField]="form"
      name="country"
      [listeners]="{
        onChange: onCountryChange
      }"
      #country="field"
    ></ng-container>
  `,
})

...

onCountryChange: FieldListenerFn<any, any, any, any, string> = ({
    value,
  }) => {
    console.log(`Country changed to: ${value}, resetting province`)
    this.form.setFieldValue('province', '')
  }
```

More information can be found at [Listeners](../listeners.md)

## Array Fields

Array fields allow you to manage a list of values within a form, such as a list of hobbies. You can create an array field using the `tanstackField` directive.

When working with array fields, you can use the fields `pushValue`, `removeValue`, and `swapValues` methods to add, remove, and swap values in the array.

Example:

```angular-ts
@Component({
  selector: 'app-root',
  standalone: true,
  imports: [TanStackField],
  template: `
    <ng-container [tanstackField]="form" name="hobbies" #hobbies="field">
      <div>
        Hobbies
        <div>
          @if (!hobbies.api.state.value.length) {
            No hobbies found
          }
          @for (_ of hobbies.api.state.value; track $index) {
            <div>
              <ng-container
                [tanstackField]="form"
                [name]="getHobbyName($index)"
                #hobbyName="field"
              >
                <div>
                  <label [for]="hobbyName.api.name">Name:</label>
                  <input
                    [id]="hobbyName.api.name"
                    [name]="hobbyName.api.name"
                    [value]="hobbyName.api.state.value"
                    (blur)="hobbyName.api.handleBlur()"
                    (input)="
                      hobbyName.api.handleChange($any($event).target.value)
                    "
                  />
                  <button
                    type="button"
                    (click)="hobbies.api.removeValue($index)"
                  >
                    X
                  </button>
                </div>
              </ng-container>
              <ng-container
                [tanstackField]="form"
                [name]="getHobbyDesc($index)"
                #hobbyDesc="field"
              >
                <div>
                  <label [for]="hobbyDesc.api.name">Description:</label>
                  <input
                    [id]="hobbyDesc.api.name"
                    [name]="hobbyDesc.api.name"
                    [value]="hobbyDesc.api.state.value"
                    (blur)="hobbyDesc.api.handleBlur()"
                    (input)="
                      hobbyDesc.api.handleChange($any($event).target.value)
                    "
                  />
                </div>
              </ng-container>
            </div>
          }
        </div>
        <button type="button" (click)="hobbies.api.pushValue(defaultHobby)">
          Add hobby
        </button>
      </div>
    </ng-container>
  `,
})
export class AppComponent {
  defaultHobby = {
    name: '',
    description: '',
    yearsOfExperience: 0,
  }

  getHobbyName = (idx: number) => `hobbies[${idx}].name` as const;
  getHobbyDesc = (idx: number) => `hobbies[${idx}].description` as const;

  form = injectForm({
    defaultValues: {
      hobbies: [] as Array<{
        name: string
        description: string
        yearsOfExperience: number
      }>,
    },
    onSubmit({ value }) {
      alert(JSON.stringify(value))
    },
  })
}
```

These are the basic concepts and terminology used in the `@tanstack/angular-form` library. Understanding these concepts will help you work more effectively with the library and create complex forms with ease.

Commit message:

docs: enhance array field methods description with additional methods (#1827)
enhance array field description

docs/framework/angular/guides/basic-concepts.md, after:

---
id: basic-concepts
title: Basic Concepts and Terminology
---

This page introduces the basic concepts and terminology used in the `@tanstack/angular-form` library. Familiarizing yourself with these concepts will help you better understand and work with the library.

## Form Instance

A Form Instance is an object that represents an individual form and provides methods and properties for working with the form. You create a form instance using the `injectForm` function. The hook accepts an object with an `onSubmit` function, which is called when the form is submitted.

```typescript
const form = injectForm({
  onSubmit: async ({ value }) => {
    // Do something with form data
    console.log(value)
  },
})
```

## Field

A Field represents a single form input element, such as a text input or a checkbox. Fields are created using the `tanstackField` directive. The directive accepts a name prop, which should match a key in the form's default values. It also exposes a `field` named instance of the directive's internals that should be used via a template variable to access the field's internals.

Example:

```html
<ng-container [tanstackField]="form" name="firstName" #firstName="field">
  <input
    [value]="firstName.api.state.value"
    (blur)="firstName.api.handleBlur()"
    (input)="firstName.api.handleChange($any($event).target.value)"
  />
</ng-container>
```

## Field State

Each field has its own state, which includes its current value, validation status, error messages, and other metadata. You can access a field's state using the `fieldApi.state` property.

Example:

```ts
const {
  value,
  meta: { errors, isValidating },
} = field.state
```

There are four states in the metadata that can be useful to see how the user interacts with a field:

- _"isTouched"_, after the user changes the field or blurs the field
- _"isDirty"_, after the field's value has been changed, even if it's been reverted to the default. Opposite of _"isPristine"_
- _"isPristine"_, until the user changes the field value. Opposite of _"isDirty"_
- _"isBlurred"_, after the field has been blurred

```ts
const { isTouched, isDirty, isPristine, isBlurred } = field.state.meta
```

![Field states](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TanStack/form/main/docs/assets/field-states.png)

## Understanding 'isDirty' in Different Libraries

Non-Persistent `dirty` state

- **Libraries**: React Hook Form (RHF), Formik, Final Form.
- **Behavior**: A field is 'dirty' if its value differs from the default. Reverting to the default value makes it 'clean' again.

Persistent `dirty` state

- **Libraries**: Angular Form, Vue FormKit.
- **Behavior**: A field remains 'dirty' once changed, even if reverted to the default value.

We have chosen the persistent 'dirty' state model. To also support a non-persistent 'dirty' state, we introduce an additional flag:

- _"isDefaultValue"_, whether the field's current value is the default value

```ts
const { isDefaultValue, isTouched } = field.state.meta

// The following line will re-create the non-Persistent `dirty` functionality.
const nonPersistentIsDirty = !isDefaultValue
```

![Field states extended](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TanStack/form/main/docs/assets/field-states-extended.png)

## Field API

The Field API is an object accessed in the `tanstackField.api` property when creating a field. It provides methods for working with the field's state.

Example:

```angular-html
<input
  [value]="fieldName.api.state.value"
  (blur)="fieldName.api.handleBlur()"
  (input)="fieldName.api.handleChange($any($event).target.value)"
/>
```

## Validation

`@tanstack/angular-form` provides both synchronous and asynchronous validation out of the box. Validation functions can be passed to the `tanstackField` directive using the `validators` prop.

Example:

```angular-ts
@Component({
  selector: 'app-root',
  standalone: true,
  imports: [TanStackField],
  template: `
    <ng-container [tanstackField]="form" name="firstName" #firstName="field">
      <input
        [value]="firstName.api.state.value"
        (blur)="firstName.api.handleBlur()"
        (input)="firstName.api.handleChange($any($event).target.value)"
      />
    </ng-container>
  `,
})
export class AppComponent {
  firstNameValidator: FieldValidateFn<any, any, string, any> = ({
                                                                       value,
                                                                     }) =>
    !value
      ? 'A first name is required'
      : value.length < 3
        ? 'First name must be at least 3 characters'
        : undefined

  firstNameAsyncValidator: FieldValidateAsyncFn<any, string, any> =
    async ({ value }) => {
      await new Promise((resolve) => setTimeout(resolve, 1000))
      return value.includes('error') && 'No "error" allowed in first name'
    }

  form = injectForm({
    defaultValues: {
      firstName: '',
    },
    onSubmit({ value }) {
      console.log(value)
    },
  })
}
```

## Validation with Standard Schema Libraries

In addition to hand-rolled validation options, we also support the [Standard Schema](https://github.com/standard-schema/standard-schema) specification.

You can define a schema using any of the libraries implementing the specification and pass it to a form or field validator.

Supported libraries include:

- [Zod](https://zod.dev/) (v3.24.0 or higher)
- [Valibot](https://valibot.dev/) (v1.0.0 or higher)
- [ArkType](https://arktype.io/) (v2.1.20 or higher)
- [Yup](https://github.com/jquense/yup) (v1.7.0 or higher)

Example:

```angular-ts
import { z } from 'zod'

@Component({
  selector: 'app-root',
  standalone: true,
  imports: [TanStackField],
  template: `
    <ng-container
      [tanstackField]="form"
      name="firstName"
      [validators]="{
        onChange: z.string().min(3, 'First name must be at least 3 characters'),
        onChangeAsyncDebounceMs: 500,
        onChangeAsync: firstNameAsyncValidator
      }"
      #firstName="field"
    >
      <!-- ... -->
    </ng-container>
  `,
})
export class AppComponent {
  firstNameAsyncValidator = z.string().refine(
    async (value) => {
      await new Promise((resolve) => setTimeout(resolve, 1000))
      return !value.includes('error')
    },
    {
      message: "No 'error' allowed in first name",
    },
  )

  form = injectForm({
    defaultValues: {
      firstName: '',
    },
    onSubmit({ value }) {
      // Do something with form data
      console.log(value)
    },
  })

  z = z
}
```

## Reactivity

`@tanstack/angular-form` offers a way to subscribe to form and field state changes via `injectStore(this.form, selector)`.

Example:

```typescript
import { injectForm, injectStore } from '@tanstack/angular-form'

@Component(/*...*/)
class AppComponent {
  form = injectForm(/*...*/)
  canSubmit = injectStore(this.form, (state) => state.canSubmit)
  isSubmitting = injectStore(this.form, (state) => state.isSubmitting)
}
```

## Listeners

`@tanstack/angular-form` allows you to react to specific triggers and "listen" to them to dispatch side effects.

Example:

```angular-ts
@Component({
  selector: 'app-root',
  standalone: true,
  imports: [TanStackField],
  template: `
    <ng-container
      [tanstackField]="form"
      name="country"
      [listeners]="{
        onChange: onCountryChange
      }"
      #country="field"
    ></ng-container>
  `,
})

...

onCountryChange: FieldListenerFn<any, any, any, any, string> = ({
    value,
  }) => {
    console.log(`Country changed to: ${value}, resetting province`)
    this.form.setFieldValue('province', '')
  }
```

More information can be found at [Listeners](../listeners.md)

## Array Fields

Array fields allow you to manage a list of values within a form, such as a list of hobbies. You can create an array field using the `tanstackField` directive.

When working with array fields, you can use the fields `pushValue`, `removeValue`, `swapValues` and `moveValue` methods to add, remove, swap, and move a value from one index to another within the array, respectively. Additional helper methods such as `insertValue`, `replaceValue`, and `clearValues` are also available for inserting, replacing, and clearing array values.

Example:

```angular-ts
@Component({
  selector: 'app-root',
  standalone: true,
  imports: [TanStackField],
  template: `
    <ng-container [tanstackField]="form" name="hobbies" #hobbies="field">
      <div>
        Hobbies
        <div>
          @if (!hobbies.api.state.value.length) {
            No hobbies found
          }
          @for (_ of hobbies.api.state.value; track $index) {
            <div>
              <ng-container
                [tanstackField]="form"
                [name]="getHobbyName($index)"
                #hobbyName="field"
              >
                <div>
                  <label [for]="hobbyName.api.name">Name:</label>
                  <input
                    [id]="hobbyName.api.name"
                    [name]="hobbyName.api.name"
                    [value]="hobbyName.api.state.value"
                    (blur)="hobbyName.api.handleBlur()"
                    (input)="
                      hobbyName.api.handleChange($any($event).target.value)
                    "
                  />
                  <button
                    type="button"
                    (click)="hobbies.api.removeValue($index)"
                  >
                    X
                  </button>
                </div>
              </ng-container>
              <ng-container
                [tanstackField]="form"
                [name]="getHobbyDesc($index)"
                #hobbyDesc="field"
              >
                <div>
                  <label [for]="hobbyDesc.api.name">Description:</label>
                  <input
                    [id]="hobbyDesc.api.name"
                    [name]="hobbyDesc.api.name"
                    [value]="hobbyDesc.api.state.value"
                    (blur)="hobbyDesc.api.handleBlur()"
                    (input)="
                      hobbyDesc.api.handleChange($any($event).target.value)
                    "
                  />
                </div>
              </ng-container>
            </div>
          }
        </div>
        <button type="button" (click)="hobbies.api.pushValue(defaultHobby)">
          Add hobby
        </button>
      </div>
    </ng-container>
  `,
})
export class AppComponent {
  defaultHobby = {
    name: '',
    description: '',
    yearsOfExperience: 0,
  }

  getHobbyName = (idx: number) => `hobbies[${idx}].name` as const;
  getHobbyDesc = (idx: number) => `hobbies[${idx}].description` as const;

  form = injectForm({
    defaultValues: {
      hobbies: [] as Array<{
        name: string
        description: string
        yearsOfExperience: number
      }>,
    },
    onSubmit({ value }) {
      alert(JSON.stringify(value))
    },
  })
}
```

These are the basic concepts and terminology used in the `@tanstack/angular-form` library. Understanding these concepts will help you work more effectively with the library and create complex forms with ease.
