docs/framework/solid/guides/basic-concepts.md, before:

---
id: basic-concepts
title: Basic Concepts and Terminology
---

This page introduces the basic concepts and terminology used in the `@tanstack/solid-form` library. Familiarizing yourself with these concepts will help you better understand and work with the library.

## Form Options

You can create options for your form so that it can be shared between multiple forms by using the `formOptions` function.

Example:

```tsx
const formOpts = formOptions({
  defaultValues: {
    firstName: '',
    lastName: '',
    hobbies: [],
  } as Person,
})
```

## Form Instance

A Form Instance is an object that represents an individual form and provides methods and properties for working with the form. You create a form instance using the `createForm` hook provided by the form options. The hook accepts an object with an `onSubmit` function, which is called when the form is submitted.

```tsx
const form = createForm(() => ({
  ...formOpts,
  onSubmit: async ({ value }) => {
    // Do something with form data
    console.log(value)
  },
}))
```

You may also create a form instance without using `formOptions` by using the standalone `createForm` API:

```tsx
const form = createForm<Person>(() => ({
  onSubmit: async ({ value }) => {
    // Do something with form data
    console.log(value)
  },
  defaultValues: {
    firstName: '',
    lastName: '',
    hobbies: [],
  },
}))
```

## Field

A Field represents a single form input element, such as a text input or a checkbox. Fields are created using the `form.Field` component provided by the form instance. The component accepts a name prop, which should match a key in the form's default values. It also accepts a children prop, which is a render prop function that takes a field object as its argument.

Example:

```tsx
<form.Field
  name="firstName"
  children={(field) => (
    <input
      name={field().name}
      value={field().state.value}
      onBlur={field().handleBlur}
      onInput={(e) => field().handleChange(e.target.value)}
    />
  )}
/>
```

## Field State

Each field has its own state, which includes its current value, validation status, error messages, and other metadata. You can access a field's state using the `field().state` property.

Example:

```ts
const {
  value,
  meta: { errors, isValidating },
} = field().state
```

There are four states in the metadata that can be useful to see how the user interacts with a field:

- _"isTouched"_, after the user changes the field or blurs the field
- _"isDirty"_, after the field's value has been changed, even if it's been reverted to the default. Opposite of `isPristine`
- _"isPristine"_, until the user changes the field value. Opposite of `isDirty`
- _"isBlurred"_, after the field has been blurred

```ts
const { isTouched, isDirty, isPristine, isBlurred } = field().state.meta
```

![Field states](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TanStack/form/main/docs/assets/field-states.png)

## Understanding 'isDirty' in Different Libraries

Non-Persistent `dirty` state

- **Libraries**: React Hook Form (RHF), Formik, Final Form.
- **Behavior**: A field is 'dirty' if its value differs from the default. Reverting to the default value makes it 'clean' again.

Persistent `dirty` state

- **Libraries**: Angular Form, Vue FormKit.
- **Behavior**: A field remains 'dirty' once changed, even if reverted to the default value.

We have chosen the persistent 'dirty' state model. To also support a non-persistent 'dirty' state, we introduce an additional flag:

- _"isDefaultValue"_, whether the field's current value is the default value

```ts
const { isDefaultValue, isTouched } = field().state.meta

// The following line will re-create the non-Persistent `dirty` functionality.
const nonPersistentIsDirty = !isDefaultValue
```

![Field states extended](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TanStack/form/main/docs/assets/field-states-extended.png)

## Field API

The Field API is an object passed to the render prop function when creating a field. It provides methods for working with the field's state.

Example:

```tsx
<input
  name={field().name}
  value={field().state.value}
  onBlur={field().handleBlur}
  onInput={(e) => field().handleChange(e.target.value)}
/>
```

## Validation

`@tanstack/solid-form` provides both synchronous and asynchronous validation out of the box. Validation functions can be passed to the `form.Field` component using the `validators` prop.

Example:

```tsx
<form.Field
  name="firstName"
  validators={{
    onChange: ({ value }) =>
      !value
        ? 'A first name is required'
        : value.length < 3
          ? 'First name must be at least 3 characters'
          : undefined,
    onChangeAsync: async ({ value }) => {
      await new Promise((resolve) => setTimeout(resolve, 1000))
      return value.includes('error') && 'No "error" allowed in first name'
    },
  }}
  children={(field) => (
    <>
      <input
        name={field().name}
        value={field().state.value}
        onBlur={field().handleBlur}
        onInput={(e) => field().handleChange(e.target.value)}
      />
      <p>{field().state.meta.errors[0]}</p>
    </>
  )}
/>
```

## Validation with Standard Schema Libraries

In addition to hand-rolled validation options, we also support the [Standard Schema](https://github.com/standard-schema/standard-schema) specification.

You can define a schema using any of the libraries implementing the specification and pass it to a form or field validator.

Supported libraries include:

- [Zod](https://zod.dev/) (v3.24.0 or higher)
- [Valibot](https://valibot.dev/) (v1.0.0 or higher)
- [ArkType](https://arktype.io/) (v2.1.20 or higher)
- [Yup](https://github.com/jquense/yup) (v1.7.0 or higher)

```tsx
import { z } from 'zod'

// ...
;<form.Field
  name="firstName"
  validators={{
    onChange: z.string().min(3, 'First name must be at least 3 characters'),
    onChangeAsyncDebounceMs: 500,
    onChangeAsync: z.string().refine(
      async (value) => {
        await new Promise((resolve) => setTimeout(resolve, 1000))
        return !value.includes('error')
      },
      {
        message: 'No "error" allowed in first name',
      },
    ),
  }}
  children={(field) => (
    <>
      <input
        name={field().name}
        value={field().state.value}
        onBlur={field().handleBlur}
        onInput={(e) => field().handleChange(e.target.value)}
      />
      <p>{field().state.meta.errors[0]}</p>
    </>
  )}
/>
```

## Reactivity

`@tanstack/solid-form` offers various ways to subscribe to form and field state changes, most notably the `form.useStore` hook and the `form.Subscribe` component. These methods allow you to optimize your form's rendering performance by only updating components when necessary.

Example:

```tsx
const firstName = form.useStore((state) => state.values.firstName)
//...
<form.Subscribe
  selector={(state) => ({
    canSubmit: state.canSubmit,
    isSubmitting: state.isSubmitting,
  })}
  children={(state) => (
    <button type="submit" disabled={!state().canSubmit}>
      {state().isSubmitting ? '...' : 'Submit'}
    </button>
  )}
/>
```

## Array Fields

Array fields allow you to manage a list of values within a form, such as a list of hobbies. You can create an array field using the `form.Field` component with the `mode="array"` prop.

When working with array fields, you can use the fields `pushValue`, `removeValue`, `swapValues` and `moveValue` methods to add, remove, and swap values in the array.

Example:

```tsx
<form.Field
  name="hobbies"
  mode="array"
  children={(hobbiesField) => (
    <div>
      Hobbies
      <div>
        <Show
          when={hobbiesField().state.value.length > 0}
          fallback={'No hobbies found.'}
        >
          <Index each={hobbiesField().state.value}>
            {(_, i) => (
              <div>
                <form.Field
                  name={`hobbies[${i}].name`}
                  children={(field) => (
                    <div>
                      <label for={field().name}>Name:</label>
                      <input
                        id={field().name}
                        name={field().name}
                        value={field().state.value}
                        onBlur={field().handleBlur}
                        onInput={(e) => field().handleChange(e.target.value)}
                      />
                      <button
                        type="button"
                        onClick={() => hobbiesField().removeValue(i)}
                      >
                        X
                      </button>
                    </div>
                  )}
                />
                <form.Field
                  name={`hobbies[${i}].description`}
                  children={(field) => {
                    return (
                      <div>
                        <label for={field().name}>Description:</label>
                        <input
                          id={field().name}
                          name={field().name}
                          value={field().state.value}
                          onBlur={field().handleBlur}
                          onInput={(e) => field().handleChange(e.target.value)}
                        />
                      </div>
                    )
                  }}
                />
              </div>
            )}
          </Index>
        </Show>
      </div>
      <button
        type="button"
        onClick={() =>
          hobbiesField().pushValue({
            name: '',
            description: '',
            yearsOfExperience: 0,
          })
        }
      >
        Add hobby
      </button>
    </div>
  )}
/>
```

These are the basic concepts and terminology used in the `@tanstack/solid-form` library. Understanding these concepts will help you work more effectively with the library and create complex forms with ease.

Commit message:

docs: enhance array field methods description with additional methods (#1827)
enhance array field description

docs/framework/solid/guides/basic-concepts.md, after:

---
id: basic-concepts
title: Basic Concepts and Terminology
---

This page introduces the basic concepts and terminology used in the `@tanstack/solid-form` library. Familiarizing yourself with these concepts will help you better understand and work with the library.

## Form Options

You can create options for your form so that it can be shared between multiple forms by using the `formOptions` function.

Example:

```tsx
const formOpts = formOptions({
  defaultValues: {
    firstName: '',
    lastName: '',
    hobbies: [],
  } as Person,
})
```

## Form Instance

A Form Instance is an object that represents an individual form and provides methods and properties for working with the form. You create a form instance using the `createForm` hook provided by the form options. The hook accepts an object with an `onSubmit` function, which is called when the form is submitted.

```tsx
const form = createForm(() => ({
  ...formOpts,
  onSubmit: async ({ value }) => {
    // Do something with form data
    console.log(value)
  },
}))
```

You may also create a form instance without using `formOptions` by using the standalone `createForm` API:

```tsx
const form = createForm<Person>(() => ({
  onSubmit: async ({ value }) => {
    // Do something with form data
    console.log(value)
  },
  defaultValues: {
    firstName: '',
    lastName: '',
    hobbies: [],
  },
}))
```

## Field

A Field represents a single form input element, such as a text input or a checkbox. Fields are created using the `form.Field` component provided by the form instance. The component accepts a name prop, which should match a key in the form's default values. It also accepts a children prop, which is a render prop function that takes a field object as its argument.

Example:

```tsx
<form.Field
  name="firstName"
  children={(field) => (
    <input
      name={field().name}
      value={field().state.value}
      onBlur={field().handleBlur}
      onInput={(e) => field().handleChange(e.target.value)}
    />
  )}
/>
```

## Field State

Each field has its own state, which includes its current value, validation status, error messages, and other metadata. You can access a field's state using the `field().state` property.

Example:

```ts
const {
  value,
  meta: { errors, isValidating },
} = field().state
```

There are four states in the metadata that can be useful to see how the user interacts with a field:

- _"isTouched"_, after the user changes the field or blurs the field
- _"isDirty"_, after the field's value has been changed, even if it's been reverted to the default. Opposite of `isPristine`
- _"isPristine"_, until the user changes the field value. Opposite of `isDirty`
- _"isBlurred"_, after the field has been blurred

```ts
const { isTouched, isDirty, isPristine, isBlurred } = field().state.meta
```

![Field states](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TanStack/form/main/docs/assets/field-states.png)

## Understanding 'isDirty' in Different Libraries

Non-Persistent `dirty` state

- **Libraries**: React Hook Form (RHF), Formik, Final Form.
- **Behavior**: A field is 'dirty' if its value differs from the default. Reverting to the default value makes it 'clean' again.

Persistent `dirty` state

- **Libraries**: Angular Form, Vue FormKit.
- **Behavior**: A field remains 'dirty' once changed, even if reverted to the default value.

We have chosen the persistent 'dirty' state model. To also support a non-persistent 'dirty' state, we introduce an additional flag:

- _"isDefaultValue"_, whether the field's current value is the default value

```ts
const { isDefaultValue, isTouched } = field().state.meta

// The following line will re-create the non-Persistent `dirty` functionality.
const nonPersistentIsDirty = !isDefaultValue
```

![Field states extended](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TanStack/form/main/docs/assets/field-states-extended.png)

## Field API

The Field API is an object passed to the render prop function when creating a field. It provides methods for working with the field's state.

Example:

```tsx
<input
  name={field().name}
  value={field().state.value}
  onBlur={field().handleBlur}
  onInput={(e) => field().handleChange(e.target.value)}
/>
```

## Validation

`@tanstack/solid-form` provides both synchronous and asynchronous validation out of the box. Validation functions can be passed to the `form.Field` component using the `validators` prop.

Example:

```tsx
<form.Field
  name="firstName"
  validators={{
    onChange: ({ value }) =>
      !value
        ? 'A first name is required'
        : value.length < 3
          ? 'First name must be at least 3 characters'
          : undefined,
    onChangeAsync: async ({ value }) => {
      await new Promise((resolve) => setTimeout(resolve, 1000))
      return value.includes('error') && 'No "error" allowed in first name'
    },
  }}
  children={(field) => (
    <>
      <input
        name={field().name}
        value={field().state.value}
        onBlur={field().handleBlur}
        onInput={(e) => field().handleChange(e.target.value)}
      />
      <p>{field().state.meta.errors[0]}</p>
    </>
  )}
/>
```

## Validation with Standard Schema Libraries

In addition to hand-rolled validation options, we also support the [Standard Schema](https://github.com/standard-schema/standard-schema) specification.

You can define a schema using any of the libraries implementing the specification and pass it to a form or field validator.

Supported libraries include:

- [Zod](https://zod.dev/) (v3.24.0 or higher)
- [Valibot](https://valibot.dev/) (v1.0.0 or higher)
- [ArkType](https://arktype.io/) (v2.1.20 or higher)
- [Yup](https://github.com/jquense/yup) (v1.7.0 or higher)

```tsx
import { z } from 'zod'

// ...
;<form.Field
  name="firstName"
  validators={{
    onChange: z.string().min(3, 'First name must be at least 3 characters'),
    onChangeAsyncDebounceMs: 500,
    onChangeAsync: z.string().refine(
      async (value) => {
        await new Promise((resolve) => setTimeout(resolve, 1000))
        return !value.includes('error')
      },
      {
        message: 'No "error" allowed in first name',
      },
    ),
  }}
  children={(field) => (
    <>
      <input
        name={field().name}
        value={field().state.value}
        onBlur={field().handleBlur}
        onInput={(e) => field().handleChange(e.target.value)}
      />
      <p>{field().state.meta.errors[0]}</p>
    </>
  )}
/>
```

## Reactivity

`@tanstack/solid-form` offers various ways to subscribe to form and field state changes, most notably the `form.useStore` hook and the `form.Subscribe` component. These methods allow you to optimize your form's rendering performance by only updating components when necessary.

Example:

```tsx
const firstName = form.useStore((state) => state.values.firstName)
//...
<form.Subscribe
  selector={(state) => ({
    canSubmit: state.canSubmit,
    isSubmitting: state.isSubmitting,
  })}
  children={(state) => (
    <button type="submit" disabled={!state().canSubmit}>
      {state().isSubmitting ? '...' : 'Submit'}
    </button>
  )}
/>
```

## Array Fields

Array fields allow you to manage a list of values within a form, such as a list of hobbies. You can create an array field using the `form.Field` component with the `mode="array"` prop.

When working with array fields, you can use the fields `pushValue`, `removeValue`, `swapValues` and `moveValue` methods to add, remove, swap, and move a value from one index to another within the array, respectively. Additional helper methods such as `insertValue`, `replaceValue`, and `clearValues` are also available for inserting, replacing, and clearing array values.

Example:

```tsx
<form.Field
  name="hobbies"
  mode="array"
  children={(hobbiesField) => (
    <div>
      Hobbies
      <div>
        <Show
          when={hobbiesField().state.value.length > 0}
          fallback={'No hobbies found.'}
        >
          <Index each={hobbiesField().state.value}>
            {(_, i) => (
              <div>
                <form.Field
                  name={`hobbies[${i}].name`}
                  children={(field) => (
                    <div>
                      <label for={field().name}>Name:</label>
                      <input
                        id={field().name}
                        name={field().name}
                        value={field().state.value}
                        onBlur={field().handleBlur}
                        onInput={(e) => field().handleChange(e.target.value)}
                      />
                      <button
                        type="button"
                        onClick={() => hobbiesField().removeValue(i)}
                      >
                        X
                      </button>
                    </div>
                  )}
                />
                <form.Field
                  name={`hobbies[${i}].description`}
                  children={(field) => {
                    return (
                      <div>
                        <label for={field().name}>Description:</label>
                        <input
                          id={field().name}
                          name={field().name}
                          value={field().state.value}
                          onBlur={field().handleBlur}
                          onInput={(e) => field().handleChange(e.target.value)}
                        />
                      </div>
                    )
                  }}
                />
              </div>
            )}
          </Index>
        </Show>
      </div>
      <button
        type="button"
        onClick={() =>
          hobbiesField().pushValue({
            name: '',
            description: '',
            yearsOfExperience: 0,
          })
        }
      >
        Add hobby
      </button>
    </div>
  )}
/>
```

These are the basic concepts and terminology used in the `@tanstack/solid-form` library. Understanding these concepts will help you work more effectively with the library and create complex forms with ease.
