docs/framework/vue/guides/submission-handling.md, before:

---
id: submission-handling
title: Submission handling
---

## Passing additional data to submission handling

You may have multiple types of submission behaviour, for example, going back to another page or staying on the form.
You can accomplish this by specifying the `onSubmitMeta` property. This meta data will be passed to the `onSubmit` function.

> Note: if `form.handleSubmit()` is called without metadata, it will use the provided default.

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { useForm } from '@tanstack/vue-form'

type FormMeta = {
  submitAction: 'continue' | 'backToMenu' | null
}

// Metadata is not required to call form.handleSubmit().
// Specify what values to use as default if no meta is passed
const defaultMeta: FormMeta = {
  submitAction: null,
}

const form = useForm({
  defaultValues: {
    data: '',
  },
  // Define what meta values to expect on submission
  onSubmitMeta: defaultMeta,
  onSubmit: async ({ value, meta }) => {
    // Do something with the values passed via handleSubmit
    console.log(`Selected action - ${meta.submitAction}`, value)
  },
})
</script>

<template>
  <form @submit.prevent.stop="">
    <button
      type="submit"
      @click="
        () => {
          // Overwrites the default specified in onSubmitMeta
          form.handleSubmit({ submitAction: 'continue' })
        }
      "
    >
      Submit and continue
    </button>
    <button
      type="submit"
      @click="() => form.handleSubmit({ submitAction: 'backToMenu' })"
    >
      Submit and back to menu
    </button>
  </form>
</template>
```

## Transforming data with Standard Schemas

While Tanstack Form provides [Standard Schema support](./validation.md) for validation, it does not preserve the Schema's output data.

The value passed to the `onSubmit` function will always be the input data. To receive the output data of a Standard Schema, parse it in the `onSubmit` function:

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { z } from 'zod'
import { useForm } from '@tanstack/vue-form'

const schema = z.object({
  age: z.string().transform((age) => Number(age)),
})

// Tanstack form uses the input type of Standard Schemas
const defaultValues: z.input<typeof schema> = {
  age: '13',
}

const form = useForm({
  defaultValues,
  validators: {
    onChange: schema,
  },
  onSubmit: ({ value }) => {
    const inputAge: string = value.age
    // Pass it through the schema to get the transformed value
    const result = schema.parse(value)
    const outputAge: number = result.age
  },
})
</script>
<template>
  <!-- ... -->
</template>
```

Commit message:

docs: fix punctuation, grammar, and consistency issues
Applied 83 corrections across 37 documentation files:
- Punctuation: Fixed abbreviations (etc., vs.), ellipsis, and missing periods
- Grammar: Corrected subject-verb agreement, possessives, and article usage
- Typos: Fixed "meta data" → "metadata", "as string" → "as a string", etc.
- Capitalization: Standardized "TanStack" and "DDoS" spelling
- Code: Fixed missing commas and formatting issues
- Consistency: Improved code style uniformity

Most common corrections:
- "etc..." → "etc." (7 occurrences)
- "Tanstack" → "TanStack" (9 occurrences)
- "based depending" → "depending" (6 occurrences)
- "matches" → "match" for subject-verb agreement (6 occurrences)

docs/framework/vue/guides/submission-handling.md, after:

---
id: submission-handling
title: Submission handling
---

## Passing additional data to submission handling

You may have multiple types of submission behaviour, for example, going back to another page or staying on the form.
You can accomplish this by specifying the `onSubmitMeta` property. This metadata will be passed to the `onSubmit` function.

> Note: if `form.handleSubmit()` is called without metadata, it will use the provided default.

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { useForm } from '@tanstack/vue-form'

type FormMeta = {
  submitAction: 'continue' | 'backToMenu' | null
}

// Metadata is not required to call form.handleSubmit().
// Specify what values to use as default if no meta is passed
const defaultMeta: FormMeta = {
  submitAction: null,
}

const form = useForm({
  defaultValues: {
    data: '',
  },
  // Define what meta values to expect on submission
  onSubmitMeta: defaultMeta,
  onSubmit: async ({ value, meta }) => {
    // Do something with the values passed via handleSubmit
    console.log(`Selected action - ${meta.submitAction}`, value)
  },
})
</script>

<template>
  <form @submit.prevent.stop="">
    <button
      type="submit"
      @click="
        () => {
          // Overwrites the default specified in onSubmitMeta
          form.handleSubmit({ submitAction: 'continue' })
        }
      "
    >
      Submit and continue
    </button>
    <button
      type="submit"
      @click="() => form.handleSubmit({ submitAction: 'backToMenu' })"
    >
      Submit and back to menu
    </button>
  </form>
</template>
```

## Transforming data with Standard Schemas

While TanStack Form provides [Standard Schema support](./validation.md) for validation, it does not preserve the Schema's output data.

The value passed to the `onSubmit` function will always be the input data. To receive the output data of a Standard Schema, parse it in the `onSubmit` function:

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
import { z } from 'zod'
import { useForm } from '@tanstack/vue-form'

const schema = z.object({
  age: z.string().transform((age) => Number(age)),
})

// TanStack form uses the input type of Standard Schemas
const defaultValues: z.input<typeof schema> = {
  age: '13',
}

const form = useForm({
  defaultValues,
  validators: {
    onChange: schema,
  },
  onSubmit: ({ value }) => {
    const inputAge: string = value.age
    // Pass it through the schema to get the transformed value
    const result = schema.parse(value)
    const outputAge: number = result.age
  },
})
</script>
<template>
  <!-- ... -->
</template>
```
