docs/framework/react/guides/ui-libraries.md, before:

---
id: ui-libraries
title: UI Libraries
---

## Usage of TanStack Form with UI Libraries

TanStack Form is a headless library, offering you complete flexibility to style it as you see fit. It's compatible with a wide range of UI libraries, including `Chakra UI`, `Tailwind`, `Material UI`, `Mantine`, `shadcn/ui`, or even plain CSS.

This guide focuses on `Chakra UI`, `Material UI`, `Mantine`, and `shadcn/ui`, but the concepts are applicable to any UI library of your choice.

### Prerequisites

Before integrating TanStack Form with a UI library, ensure the necessary dependencies are installed in your project:

- For `Chakra UI`, follow the installation instructions on their [official site](https://chakra-ui.com/docs/get-started/installation)
- For `Material UI`, follow the installation instructions on their [official site](https://mui.com/material-ui/getting-started/).
- For `Mantine`, refer to their [documentation](https://mantine.dev/).
- For `shadcn/ui`, refer to their [official site](https://ui.shadcn.com/).

Note: While you can mix and match libraries, it's generally advisable to stick with one to maintain consistency and minimize bloat.

### Example with Mantine

Here's an example demonstrating the integration of TanStack Form with Mantine components:

```tsx
import { TextInput, Checkbox } from '@mantine/core'
import { useForm } from '@tanstack/react-form'

export default function App() {
  const { Field, handleSubmit, state } = useForm({
    defaultValues: {
      name: '',
      isChecked: false,
    },
    onSubmit: async ({ value }) => {
      // Handle form submission
      console.log(value)
    },
  })

  return (
    <>
      <form
        onSubmit={(e) => {
          e.preventDefault()
          handleSubmit()
        }}
      >
        <Field
          name="name"
          children={({ state, handleChange, handleBlur }) => (
            <TextInput
              defaultValue={state.value}
              onChange={(e) => handleChange(e.target.value)}
              onBlur={handleBlur}
              placeholder="Enter your name"
            />
          )}
        />
        <Field
          name="isChecked"
          children={({ state, handleChange, handleBlur }) => (
            <Checkbox
              onChange={(e) => handleChange(e.target.checked)}
              onBlur={handleBlur}
              checked={state.value}
            />
          )}
        />
      </form>
      <div>
        <pre>{JSON.stringify(state.values, null, 2)}</pre>
      </div>
    </>
  )
}
```

- Initially, we utilize the `useForm` hook from TanStack and destructure the necessary properties. This step is optional; alternatively, you could use `const form = useForm()` if preferred. TypeScript's type inference ensures a smooth experience regardless of the approach.
- The `Field` component, derived from `useForm`, accepts several properties, such as `validators`. For this demonstration, we focus on two primary properties: `name` and `children`.
  - The `name` property identifies each `Field`, for instance, `name` in our example.
  - The `children` property leverages the concept of render props, allowing us to integrate components without unnecessary abstractions.
- TanStack's design relies heavily on render props, providing access to `children` within the `Field` component. This approach is entirely type-safe. When integrating with Mantine components, such as `TextInput`, we selectively destructure properties like `state.value`, `handleChange`, and `handleBlur`. This selective approach is due to the slight differences in types between `TextInput` and the `field` we get in the children.
- By following these steps, you can seamlessly integrate Mantine components with TanStack Form.
- This methodology is equally applicable to other components, such as `Checkbox`, ensuring consistent integration across different UI elements.

### Usage with Material UI

The process for integrating Material UI components is similar. Here's an example using TextField and Checkbox from Material UI:

```tsx
<Field
  name="name"
  children={({ state, handleChange, handleBlur }) => {
    return (
      <TextField
        id="filled-basic"
        label="Filled"
        variant="filled"
        defaultValue={state.value}
        onChange={(e) => handleChange(e.target.value)}
        onBlur={handleBlur}
        placeholder="Enter your name"
      />
    );
  }}
/>

<Field
  name="isMuiCheckBox"
  children={({ state, handleChange, handleBlur }) => {
    return (
      <MuiCheckbox
        onChange={(e) => handleChange(e.target.checked)}
        onBlur={handleBlur}
        checked={state.value}
      />
    );
  }}
/>

```

- The integration approach is the same as with Mantine.
- The primary difference lies in the specific Material UI component properties and styling options.

### Usage with shadcn/ui

The process for integrating shadcn/ui components is similar. Here's an example using Input and Checkbox from shadcn/ui:

```tsx
<Field
  name="name"
  children={({ state, handleChange, handleBlur }) => (
    <Input
      value={state.value}
      onChange={(e) => handleChange(e.target.value)}
      onBlur={handleBlur}
      placeholder="Enter your name"
    />
  )}
/>
<Field
  name="isChecked"
  children={({ state, handleChange, handleBlur }) => (
    <Checkbox
      onCheckedChange={(checked) => handleChange(checked === true)}
      onBlur={handleBlur}
      checked={state.value}
    />
  )}
/>
```

- The integration approach is the same as with Mantine, Material UI.
- The primary difference lies in the specific shadcn/ui component properties and styling options.
- Note the onCheckedChange property of Checkbox instead of onChange.

The ShadCN library includes a dedicated guide covering common scenarios for integrating TanStack Form with its components: [https://ui.shadcn.com/docs/forms/tanstack-form](https://ui.shadcn.com/docs/forms/tanstack-form)

### Usage with Chakra UI

The process for integrating Chakra UI components is similar. Here's an example using Input and Checkbox from Chakra UI:

```tsx
<Field
  name="name"
  children={({ state, handleChange, handleBlur }) => (
    <Input
      value={state.value}
      onChange={(e) => handleChange(e.target.value)}
      onBlur={handleBlur}
      placeholder="Enter your name"
    />
  )}
/>
<Field
  name="isChecked"
  children={({ state, handleChange, handleBlur }) => (
    <Checkbox.Root
      checked={state.value}
      onCheckedChange={(details) => handleChange(!!details.checked)}
      onBlur={handleBlur}
    >
      <Checkbox.HiddenInput />
      <Checkbox.Control />
      <Checkbox.Label>Accept terms</Checkbox.Label>
    </Checkbox.Root>
  )}
/>
```

- The integration approach is the same as with Mantine, Material UI, and shadcn/ui.
- Chakra UI exposes its Checkbox as a composable component with separate `Checkbox.Root`, `Checkbox.Control`, `Checkbox.Label`, and `Checkbox.HiddenInput` parts that you wire together.
- Alternatively, Chakra UI offers a pre-composed Checkbox component that works the same way as their standard examples, without requiring manual composition. You can learn more about this closed component approach in the [Chakra UI Checkbox documentation](https://chakra-ui.com/docs/components/checkbox#closed-component).
- The TanStack Form integration works identically with either approach—simply attach the `checked`, `onCheckedChange`, and `onBlur` handlers to your chosen component.

Example using the closed Checkbox component:

```tsx
<Field
  name="isChecked"
  children={({ state, handleChange, handleBlur }) => (
    <Checkbox
      checked={state.value}
      onCheckedChange={(details) => handleChange(!!details.checked)}
      onBlur={handleBlur}
    >
      Accept terms
    </Checkbox>
  )}
/>
```

Commit message:

docs: Update Chakra UI Checkbox example in UI libraries guide

docs/framework/react/guides/ui-libraries.md, after:

---
id: ui-libraries
title: UI Libraries
---

## Usage of TanStack Form with UI Libraries

TanStack Form is a headless library, offering you complete flexibility to style it as you see fit. It's compatible with a wide range of UI libraries, including `Chakra UI`, `Tailwind`, `Material UI`, `Mantine`, `shadcn/ui`, or even plain CSS.

This guide focuses on `Chakra UI`, `Material UI`, `Mantine`, and `shadcn/ui`, but the concepts are applicable to any UI library of your choice.

### Prerequisites

Before integrating TanStack Form with a UI library, ensure the necessary dependencies are installed in your project:

- For `Chakra UI`, follow the installation instructions on their [official site](https://chakra-ui.com/docs/get-started/installation)
- For `Material UI`, follow the installation instructions on their [official site](https://mui.com/material-ui/getting-started/).
- For `Mantine`, refer to their [documentation](https://mantine.dev/).
- For `shadcn/ui`, refer to their [official site](https://ui.shadcn.com/).

Note: While you can mix and match libraries, it's generally advisable to stick with one to maintain consistency and minimize bloat.

### Example with Mantine

Here's an example demonstrating the integration of TanStack Form with Mantine components:

```tsx
import { TextInput, Checkbox } from '@mantine/core'
import { useForm } from '@tanstack/react-form'

export default function App() {
  const { Field, handleSubmit, state } = useForm({
    defaultValues: {
      name: '',
      isChecked: false,
    },
    onSubmit: async ({ value }) => {
      // Handle form submission
      console.log(value)
    },
  })

  return (
    <>
      <form
        onSubmit={(e) => {
          e.preventDefault()
          handleSubmit()
        }}
      >
        <Field
          name="name"
          children={({ state, handleChange, handleBlur }) => (
            <TextInput
              defaultValue={state.value}
              onChange={(e) => handleChange(e.target.value)}
              onBlur={handleBlur}
              placeholder="Enter your name"
            />
          )}
        />
        <Field
          name="isChecked"
          children={({ state, handleChange, handleBlur }) => (
            <Checkbox
              onChange={(e) => handleChange(e.target.checked)}
              onBlur={handleBlur}
              checked={state.value}
            />
          )}
        />
      </form>
      <div>
        <pre>{JSON.stringify(state.values, null, 2)}</pre>
      </div>
    </>
  )
}
```

- Initially, we utilize the `useForm` hook from TanStack and destructure the necessary properties. This step is optional; alternatively, you could use `const form = useForm()` if preferred. TypeScript's type inference ensures a smooth experience regardless of the approach.
- The `Field` component, derived from `useForm`, accepts several properties, such as `validators`. For this demonstration, we focus on two primary properties: `name` and `children`.
  - The `name` property identifies each `Field`, for instance, `name` in our example.
  - The `children` property leverages the concept of render props, allowing us to integrate components without unnecessary abstractions.
- TanStack's design relies heavily on render props, providing access to `children` within the `Field` component. This approach is entirely type-safe. When integrating with Mantine components, such as `TextInput`, we selectively destructure properties like `state.value`, `handleChange`, and `handleBlur`. This selective approach is due to the slight differences in types between `TextInput` and the `field` we get in the children.
- By following these steps, you can seamlessly integrate Mantine components with TanStack Form.
- This methodology is equally applicable to other components, such as `Checkbox`, ensuring consistent integration across different UI elements.

### Usage with Material UI

The process for integrating Material UI components is similar. Here's an example using TextField and Checkbox from Material UI:

```tsx
<Field
  name="name"
  children={({ state, handleChange, handleBlur }) => {
    return (
      <TextField
        id="filled-basic"
        label="Filled"
        variant="filled"
        defaultValue={state.value}
        onChange={(e) => handleChange(e.target.value)}
        onBlur={handleBlur}
        placeholder="Enter your name"
      />
    );
  }}
/>

<Field
  name="isMuiCheckBox"
  children={({ state, handleChange, handleBlur }) => {
    return (
      <MuiCheckbox
        onChange={(e) => handleChange(e.target.checked)}
        onBlur={handleBlur}
        checked={state.value}
      />
    );
  }}
/>

```

- The integration approach is the same as with Mantine.
- The primary difference lies in the specific Material UI component properties and styling options.

### Usage with shadcn/ui

The process for integrating shadcn/ui components is similar. Here's an example using Input and Checkbox from shadcn/ui:

```tsx
<Field
  name="name"
  children={({ state, handleChange, handleBlur }) => (
    <Input
      value={state.value}
      onChange={(e) => handleChange(e.target.value)}
      onBlur={handleBlur}
      placeholder="Enter your name"
    />
  )}
/>
<Field
  name="isChecked"
  children={({ state, handleChange, handleBlur }) => (
    <Checkbox
      onCheckedChange={(checked) => handleChange(checked === true)}
      onBlur={handleBlur}
      checked={state.value}
    />
  )}
/>
```

- The integration approach is the same as with Mantine, Material UI.
- The primary difference lies in the specific shadcn/ui component properties and styling options.
- Note the onCheckedChange property of Checkbox instead of onChange.

The ShadCN library includes a dedicated guide covering common scenarios for integrating TanStack Form with its components: [https://ui.shadcn.com/docs/forms/tanstack-form](https://ui.shadcn.com/docs/forms/tanstack-form)

### Usage with Chakra UI

The process for integrating Chakra UI components is similar. Here's an example using Input and Checkbox from Chakra UI:

```tsx
<Field
  name="name"
  children={({ state, handleChange, handleBlur }) => (
    <Input
      value={state.value}
      onChange={(e) => handleChange(e.target.value)}
      onBlur={handleBlur}
      placeholder="Enter your name"
    />
  )}
/>
<Field
  name="isChecked"
  children={({ state, handleChange, handleBlur }) => (
    <Checkbox.Root
      checked={state.value}
      onCheckedChange={(details) => handleChange(!!details.checked)}
      onBlur={handleBlur}
    >
      <Checkbox.HiddenInput />
      <Checkbox.Control />
      <Checkbox.Label>Accept terms</Checkbox.Label>
    </Checkbox.Root>
  )}
/>
```

- The integration approach is the same as with Mantine, Material UI, and shadcn/ui.
- Chakra UI exposes its Checkbox as a composable component with separate `Checkbox.Root`, `Checkbox.Control`, `Checkbox.Label`, and `Checkbox.HiddenInput` parts that you wire together.
- The double negation `!!` is used on `onCheckedChange` to coerce Chakra's `"indeterminate"` state to a boolean, ensuring it matches the form state. See the [Chakra UI Checkbox documentation](https://chakra-ui.com/docs/components/checkbox#indeterminate) for more details.
- Alternatively, Chakra UI offers a pre-composed Checkbox component that works the same way as their standard examples, without requiring manual composition. You can learn more about this closed component approach in the [Chakra UI Checkbox documentation](https://chakra-ui.com/docs/components/checkbox#closed-component).
- The TanStack Form integration works identically with either approach—simply attach the `checked`, `onCheckedChange`, and `onBlur` handlers to your chosen component.

Example using the closed Checkbox component:

```tsx
<Field
  name="isChecked"
  children={({ state, handleChange, handleBlur }) => (
    <Checkbox
      checked={state.value}
      onCheckedChange={(details) => handleChange(!!details.checked)}
      onBlur={handleBlur}
    >
      Accept terms
    </Checkbox>
  )}
/>
```
